Migrations (#136)
kwilteam/docs: docs/node/migrations/zero-downtime-migrations/migration-proposal.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: "Migration Proposal"
id: migration-proposal
title: Migration Proposal
description: "Migration Proposal"
slug: /node/migrations/zero-downtime-migrations/migration-proposal
---

> Migration Declaration is a network governance proposal to coordinate the network migration process. The migration proposal includes the activation period, duration, and the new chain ID that the network will migrate to.

Reviewer: Similar to the Offline migration section, I also think you need something to introduce that we are now talking about zero-downtime migrations. For example:

```
Zero-downtime migrations begin with validators proposing, voting, and agreeing for a migration to take place. Anyone (validator, accounts, etc.) can submit a migration proposal; however, only validators can vote on and initiate the validation process.
```

Reviewer 2: Would also be good here to list the stages of migration: proposal, approval, activation delay period (?), creation of new genesis state, streaming of change sets from old-> new network, recording of new changesets on new network in governance transactions, approval and application of changesets on net network, end of migration period.

Reviewer 2: For the current paragraph though, some suggested rewording:

> A network migration is proposed by a validator using a special network
governance resolution.  The migration proposal includes the activation period,
duration, and the chain ID of the new network. The body of the migration
resolution comprises the fields of the following `MigrationDeclaration` struct.

> ```go

Reviewer: Why are you showing the Go code if the proposal process is done with `kwil-admin` ?

// MigrationDeclaration creates a new migration. It is used to agree on terms of a migration,
// and is voted on using Kwil's vote store.
type MigrationDeclaration struct {
	// ActivationPeriod is the amount of blocks before the migration is activated.
	// It starts after the migration is approved via the voting system.
	// The intention is to allow validators to prepare for the migration.
	ActivationPeriod uint64
	// Duration is the amount of blocks the migration will take to complete.
	Duration uint64
	// ChainID is the new chain ID that the network will migrate to.
	// A new chain ID should always be used for a new network, to avoid
	// cross-network replay attacks.
	ChainID string
}
```

> The Migration proposal needs to be approved by atleast 2/3rd of the validators to start the migration process. The migration proposal will get expired if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days considering the block rate of 6sec). Once the migration proposal is approved, the network moves into migration mode after the specified activation period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Migration proposal needs to be approved by atleast 2/3rd of the validators to start the migration process. The migration proposal will expire if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days considering the block rate of 6sec). Once the migration proposal is approved, the network moves into migration mode after the specified activation period.
```

> ```

Reviewer: Again, I think the Go code is kind of confusing here. I think you could just have a bullet point for each item on the `MigrationDeclaration` and present it as: "Hey, here are the important components of a migration proposal."

Reviewer 2: I agree this `MigrationResolution`  struct is unnecessary since you've explained it in text above, plus none of it is configurable in any way, unlike the proposal declaration.

// MigrationResolution is the definition for the network migration vote type in Kwil's
// voting system.
var MigrationResolution = resolutions.ResolutionConfig{
	ConfirmationThreshold: big.NewRat(2, 3),
	ExpirationPeriod:      100800, // 1 week
	ResolveFunc: func(ctx context.Context, app *common.App, resolution *resolutions.Resolution, block *common.BlockContext) error {
		return startMigration(ctx, app, resolution, block)
	},
}
```

## Submit Migration Proposal

A validator operator can submit a migration proposal to upgrade the network using the `kwil-admin migrate propose` command as shown below. Refer to the [kwil-admin migrate](/docs/ref/kwil-admin/migration/propose) documentation for more details.

```bash
kwil-admin migrate propose --activation-period <activationPeriod> --duration <migrationDuration> --chain-id <newChainID> --rpcserver /tmp/kwil.sock
```

:::note

> An off-chain communication is required among the validator operators to decide on the details of the migration proposal. One of the validators should submit the proposal to the network for approval. Only one proposal can be applied to the network during the lifetime of the network. If multiple validators submit the same proposal, the network will only consider the first proposal submitted.

Reviewer: Is this true even if the network rejects the proposal? For example, a proposal is submitted and then expires. Can we submit a new proposal?

:::

To check if the proposal is submitted successfully, we can get the list of pending migration proposals as shown below:

```bash
kwil-admin migration list --rpcserver /tmp/kwild.socket
```
This list will contain the proposal ID which is used by the validators to vote on the proposal.

## Approve Migration Proposal

To start the migration, the migration proposal needs the approval from at least a supermajority of the validators. The validators can submit their vote approval on the migration proposal using the below command.

```bash
kwil-admin migration approve <proposal-id>
```

Operators can check the status of the proposal and the votes information as shown below:

```bash
kwil-admin migration status <proposal-id>
```

:::note

> The migration proposal will get expired if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days considering the block rate of 6sec). The proposal can be resubmitted after the expiration.

Reviewer: You can remove this `:::note` since it is already mentioned above.

:::

### Existing Network Moves Into Migration Mode

Once the proposal is approved, migration is set to start after the specified activation period from the approval block. At the start of the migration, all the existing nodes will generate a snapshot of the network state at the activation height and a genesis file to be used by the new network. The snapshots and genesis files generated at the start of the migration can be downloaded as shown below:

```bash
kwil-admin migration genesis-state --output-dir </path/to/root-dir>
```

> :::note

Reviewer: Maybe better as a `:::tip`, just since you use a lot of notes already

```suggestion
:::tip
```

The command will not download any files if there is no approved migration or the migration is not yet started. Please retry the command after the migration is activated.
:::

The genesis file downloaded will have the following information set:
- `chain-id`: Chain id of the new network.
- `app_hash`: This field is set based on the hash of the downloaded network snapshot file at the migration start height. The data app hash field is mandatory to ensure that all the nodes in the network start with the same state using the snapshot files.
- `validators`: This field is set to the validators from the existing network.
- `consensus_params.migration.start_height`: The start height of the migration. Specifies the height from which the state changes are to be replicated onto the new network.
- `consensus_params.migration.end_height`: The end height of the migration. Specifies the height until which the state changes are to be replicated onto the new network.

> During the network migration, the existing network will continue to operate but with limited capabilities. It will continues to support "inserts/updates/deletes" on user datasets as usual but the below functionalities will be disabled during the migration period:

Reviewer: You should add a note that the disabled functionalities work on the new chain instead. Right now, this reads like all oracles and resolutions will stop working during a migration, which could be a big red flag.

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: "Migration Proposal"
id: migration-proposal
title: Migration Proposal
description: "Migration Proposal"
slug: /node/migrations/zero-downtime-migrations/migration-proposal
---

Migration Declaration is a network governance proposal to coordinate the network migration process. The migration proposal includes the activation period, duration, and the new chain ID that the network will migrate to.

```go
// MigrationDeclaration creates a new migration. It is used to agree on terms of a migration,
// and is voted on using Kwil's vote store.
type MigrationDeclaration struct {
	// ActivationPeriod is the amount of blocks before the migration is activated.
	// It starts after the migration is approved via the voting system.
	// The intention is to allow validators to prepare for the migration.
	ActivationPeriod uint64
	// Duration is the amount of blocks the migration will take to complete.
	Duration uint64
	// ChainID is the new chain ID that the network will migrate to.
	// A new chain ID should always be used for a new network, to avoid
	// cross-network replay attacks.
	ChainID string
}
```

> The Migration proposal needs to be approved by atleast 2/3rd of the validators to start the migration process. The migration proposal will expire if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days considering the block rate of 6sec). Once the migration proposal is approved, the network moves into migration mode after the specified activation period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The migration proposal needs to be approved by more than 2/3rd of the validators to start the migration process. The migration proposal will expire if the super-majority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days with a 6 sec block interval). Once the migration proposal is approved, the network moves into migration mode after the specified activation period.
```

Reviewer 2: Hmm, apparently "supermajority" (unhyphenated) is a real word. NVM that change I guess.

## Approve Migration Proposal

To start the migration, the migration proposal needs the approval from at least a supermajority of the validators. The validators can submit their vote approval on the migration proposal using the below command.

```bash
kwil-admin migration approve <proposal-id>
```

Operators can check the status of the proposal and the votes information as shown below:

```bash
kwil-admin migration status <proposal-id>
```

:::note
The migration proposal will get expired if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days considering the block rate of 6sec). The proposal can be resubmitted after the expiration.
:::

### Existing Network Moves Into Migration Mode

Once the proposal is approved, migration is set to start after the specified activation period from the approval block. At the start of the migration, all the existing nodes will generate a snapshot of the network state at the activation height and a genesis file to be used by the new network. The snapshots and genesis files generated at the start of the migration can be downloaded as shown below:

```bash

> kwil-admin migration genesis-state --output-dir </path/to/root-dir>

Reviewer 2: Where is it expected that this command should be run?  I just ran it on the old node itself and manually copied the files over to the new node.  But if the admin service is accessible from the new node (config out of scope here) it can be run on the new node directly.

Would be best to comment on this.

```

:::tip
The command will not download any files if there is no approved migration or the migration is not yet started. Please retry the command after the migration is activated.
:::

The genesis file downloaded will have the following information set:

> - `chain-id`: Chain id of the new network.

Reviewer 2: `chain_id`

- `app_hash`: This field is set based on the hash of the downloaded network snapshot file at the migration start height. The data app hash field is mandatory to ensure that all the nodes in the network start with the same state using the snapshot files.

> - `validators`: This field is set to the validators from the existing network.

Reviewer 2: I think we decided that this can be edited?  I'm going through a zdt migration now, and the old network has two validators, but I'm testing with a new network starting with just one validator.  So I removed the second one in this section.  That should work right?

Also, somewhere in this page there should be mention of configuring the new node with an RPC service from which it will pull the changes to replicate during the migration period between start_height and end_height.

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: "Migration Proposal"
id: migration-proposal
title: Migration Proposal
description: "Network governance proposal to trigger a network migration"
slug: /node/migrations/zero-downtime-migrations/migration-proposal
---

A network migration is proposed by a validator using a special network governance resolution. The migration proposal includes the activation period, duration, and the chain ID of the new network as shown below.

- `ActivationPeriod`: The amount of blocks before the migration is activated. It starts after the migration is approved via the voting system. The intention is to allow validators to prepare for the migration.
- `Duration`: The amount of blocks the migration will take to complete.
- `ChainID`: The new chain ID that the network will migrate to. A new chain ID should always be used for a new network to avoid cross-network replay attacks.
- `Timestamp`: The time at which the migration was proposed.

> 
> The Migration proposal needs to be approved by atleast 2/3rd of the validators to start the migration process. The migration proposal will expire if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days with a 6sec block interval). Once the migration proposal is approved, the network moves into migration mode after the specified activation period.

Reviewer: Typo:

```suggestion

The Migration proposal needs to be approved by at least 2/3rd of the validators to start the migration process. The migration proposal will expire if the supermajority of the validators do not approve the proposal within `100800` blocks (roughly 7 days with a 6 second block interval). Once the migration proposal is approved, the network moves into migration mode after the specified activation period.
```

## Submit Migration Proposal

A validator operator can submit a migration proposal to upgrade the network using the `kwil-admin migrate propose` command as shown below. Refer to the [kwil-admin migrate](/docs/ref/kwil-admin/migration/propose) documentation for more details.

```bash
kwil-admin migrate propose --activation-period <activationPeriod> --duration <migrationDuration> --chain-id <newChainID> --rpcserver /tmp/kwil.sock
```

:::note

> An off-chain communication is required among the validator operators to decide on the details of the migration proposal. One of the validators should submit the proposal to the network for approval. Only one proposal can be applied to the network during the lifetime of the network. Once the proposal is approved, all the other migration proposals will be rejected from the network and no new proposals can be submitted or approved.

Reviewer: Does this mean that a chain can only have one migration proposal over its entire lifetime? For example, TSN uses zero-downtime migrations to go from kwil v0.9 to kwil v0.10. Does that mean it can't use zero downtime migrations to go from v0.10 to v0.11?

Reviewer: I have a feeling the actual behavior is 1 network migration per chain-id. If that is the case, this note should say so.
